[Translation via translate.google.com from German to English]

Preface.
The dictionary, which I hereby give to the public, is originally out
my own needs. I saw that I did not change the understandings
the Vedas, as if, at least for the main part and the basis of it,
the Rig-Veda, when reading it not only a translation but also a translation
also laid out a complete glossary. The use of the so accumulated
Materials granted me in my linguistic, namely comparative language work
so strong promotion that I decided to process the same and become the same to me
Help to make it generally accessible. I was working on the dictionary
until well over half progressed when I learned that Upright editing
of such a dictionary. Since I do not qualify for such a person
Could hold works as this excellent linguist, at the same time as few
Others, the entire literature serving to illustrate the RV accessible literature, so decided
I, indeed, for my own use, the elaboration in the same way as they began
was to complete, but to make the publication dependent on whether upright's plan
realized or not. When the work was ready for printing, I learned of
well-known scholars, to whom the newer literature in this area are most accurately known
and also through their personal relationships with linguists working in England
more than others could judge, whether such a dictionary in the near future
that there was nothing of the kind in the works, and was asked by them to put pressure on them
in my dictionary. So I did not believe the publication
to be allowed to move further.

   Of course, the basis of my work is the Petersburg Dictionary, with which
a new epoch in Sanskrit philology and especially in the understanding of the
Vedas began. It is therefore the results obtained there, and especially those laid down therein
Roth's groundbreaking work on the Vedas has been adviced by me everywhere,
and of the many deviations from the view expressed there, as well as that excellent one
Work deserves, only after careful examination and after comparison of all concerned
Make entrance allowed. By name, I'm in the root of the tribes (roots)
for the bendable words again more to the previous practice decreased by me
? as far as possible avoiding to set up such genealogies, which in the language itself

(Page VI Foreword)

as such do not occur; Thus, for the declinable words I use the form as
Initial form, which they are the first members of compositions (apart from phonetic
Transformations) have really, so z. B. pitṙ, not pitar, bṙhat and not bṙhant u. s. w .;
furthermore, for the verbs, the form which they assume as verbalia; Under the verbal understand
I the declinirable form of the verb, which either contains no suffix or only that
attached after short vowels t, so z. B. vṙdh, not vardh because of the verbal vṙdh [cf. ṙtāvṙdh
u. s. w.], bhṙ, not bhar because of the verbal bhṙt, gir, not even or gṝ because of the verbal gir,
hu, not hvā or hve because of the verbal hû [deva-hû u. s. w.]. Where two different
Verbalia are present, such. B. hvŕ-t and hrú-t, are also two root forms hvṙ and hru
to be set. For every word, all forms occurring in the RV and to every form are all
Specified places where it occurs; only in some very common forms
or inflexible words are the bodies, unless they claim a particular interest
taken, only to a certain song completely listed, which then s.der relevant
The place of the dictionary is noticed. Sámaveda (SV.), Atharva-veda (AV.), Vājasaneyi Samhita
(VS.) are only cited where they are for ascertaining the form and meaning of importance
rails. In the forms of declinable words, the order is that of Panini
V (Voc.), N. (Nom.), A. (Acc.), I. (Instr.), D. (Dat.), Ab. (Abi.), G. (Gen. )
L. (Loc.), First in the singular [s.], Then in the dual [d., Du.] And plural [p., Pl.], Among the
In gender, N. and A. of the neutr. [N.] Are always placed below the A. of the masc. [M.], And the
fem. [f.], where it has a special form, behind all the forms of the other two
Gender. Each such form is only used from the last vowel of the stem form
and the rest indicated by a prime line, z. B. from the tribe aṅçumát
the form aṅçumátīm is expressed by -átīm. Only if two different strains (eg
ábibhīvas, weak ábibhyus) are given, the forms from there on, where a deviation
both tribes enters, sat down (eg -yuṣā for ábibhyuṣā). Under the verbal forms
All personal forms precede the impersonal one, that of the
Stammverbs those of the liabilities, Causalia, Intensiva and Desiderativa. Begin under them
the forms arising out of the present-stem-tree (which tribe is called par excellence),
to which the bare present stem (or its reinforcement) is translated as the headline
which then, similar to the noun, the abbreviated spelling of the individual forms
adjoined. Among all these forms, all active forms precede the medial, the
Modes appear in the sequence Ind., Conj., Opt., Imperative; where there are multiple conjunctives,
the one with present endings leads the way with the imperfect one; appear in every mode
then the person forms in the familiar order. On the present forms of a tribe
then, under a new heading, follow the forms of imperfection arising from the same stock,
if they have preserved the augment; the augmentless imperfect forms coincide
the second conjunctiv and stand there too. Then follows in the same way
Perfect, then the (rare) Plusquamperfect and Futur (on -iṣyāmi), then the Aorist. Under
In the impersonal forms, the beginning is made by the participles, which form the different tenses
belong and have sprung from them; then they follow from no particular time form
sprung participles, of which I for brevity on -ta or -na as
Part II, which refers to -tṙ as Part III., Which refers to -tva, -ya (-enya u., S. w.) As Part IV
have, because the usual names for them are completely useless. Then follow the absolutes
(on -ya, -tvā, etc.) and infinitives, last the verbal (s.o.). In the Citaten is in the
Rule for every adjective its noun, for every genetic the noun or verb of which
it depends on each verb its revision, on nouns the most characteristic one
Added adjectives; what is placed before the citing number refers to all
immediately following passages, yet the word is, if not directly cited in the
Form occurs in the next following places, put in brackets; what is behind the citation
stands, refers only to this one place. In places that are related
are, represent the sign - the word in the specified form. Underlying the text

[Preface. vii]

of upright, but with continuous use of the improvements given by M. Müller
this text. By the Transcription Upright I deviate by name,
where he designates a simple sound by two letters, because such designations at
a dictionary are highly confusing; to the end I write ṙ instead of ṛi, r̄ instead of ṙî [?],
ṣ instead of sh, ē instead of ai, ō instead of au; These last two terms can become sterile errors
Give cause; for comparative works they are just like the signs e
and to avoid o, and to set for them e = ai, o = au, ē = āi, ō = āu; only with the aspirates
I kept the compound spelling, which is more likely than they
in the lexicographical arrangement, they cause the same place, one likes them like one
or how to treat two letters; I also have the composite sign ḷi, since it
preserved only in forms of root kalp. In the name of the Accente
I deviate in so far as I use the flat long vocal by a horizontal line, the
stress through a roof (^) sign, so instead of â, â instead of ã write, and that I the
Svarita by Accentuirung the preceding semivowel (y, v) expressions, ie z. B. asmadrýac
instead of writing asmadryàc. Where these semi-vowels are to be spoken as vowels, write
me as such; a word like mártya, ámartya does not exist in the RV, but only
mártia, ámartia, and I could not win over myself, to pick up those unforms,
but for practical reasons, I put them in parentheses and they put them in order
based on. Likewise, I have the slurring in the text between the
single words (sandhi) completely abolished, which is very much for the lexical transparency
is beneficial, and where vocalization takes place in the original text
Sign ˘ interposed. How much the applied in the handwritten texts
Slurling differs from the connection of words as the metronome requires
particularly striking at the meeting of an a or with the ṙ of a following
Word or compositional element. In the surviving texts these are coinciding
Vocals always separated, metric only when either -a, -ā for -as, -e, -ās, -ē,
and for -ār, -ān (in the obsolete nominative forms mātār, hótār, víbhvān, which in 399.6;
127.10; 329.3; 332.6; 564.3 must be adopted and the Greek [greek] u. s. w.
correspond) is written and where the full Scbreibart must be restored, or
if the ṙ is followed by a double-consonant (ṙtvíya 275,2; ṙṣṭí 167,3; 169,3; 648,5) by here
the accumulation of three consonants is avoided, or if the coinciding vocals
belong to two metrically separated lines of verse (where metrical never takes place, in
Texts, on the other hand, as soon as the delimiter is missing) or, finally, when the coinciding ones
 Vocals are separated by the Verschnittschnitt; the latter occurs only rarely (five times)
one (319.7, 357.9, 202.12, 906.7, 956.6). In all other cases, a, ā becomes as follows
verschl turned to ar. (The one case 925,2, where the slipping is omitted, and the two
Cases where it breaks the rule, 688,4 and 913,15, are based on wrong reading.) Off
To these phenomena we must conclude that before ṙ and probably before all
The endings -as, -e (= a + i), -ās, -ē ​​(= ā + i) do not yet vocalize their final (s, i or y)
lost. This justifies the type of writing I use all the more;
it can never give rise to confusion, since the comparison with the traditional texts,
which is rightly based on expenditure, is always immediately possible.

The etymology, as it often determines the importance of significant influence
is, could not be missing, but I have them with reference to Curtius, basic features of the Greek
 Etymology (Cu.), Fick, Comparative Dictionary animal Indo-European languages
1870 (Fi), Kuhn, Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Sprachforschung (Ku.), Böhtlingk and Roth,
Sanskrit Dictionary (BR.), Benfey, Glossary on the Sāma Veda, as well as occasional
on other works, as briefly as possible compositions by one of the limbs
designating separating stroke.

The meanings I have, where it seemed necessary, in their connection to the
derived basic meaning, but then simply by consecutive numbers

[VIII preface.]

the meanings or modes of use in the way in which they are considered to be the view of the cited
The most appropriate seemed to be strung together and related to the cited passages,
so that it becomes clear what meaning or mode of action I cited in the words in each
Place enclosed. Here, therefore, the subjective conception plays a major role, and later work
There are certainly many things to correct here, especially in order to make my work as useful as possible
often have meanings or ways of doing things divorced, only by a quiet
Shading differ from each other.
For the extremely time-consuming correction, the publishing company in Leipzig has indeed
but it remains mine, the nature of the matter
the main work. I can pronounce the certain assurance that at least until now
all the passages quoted are correctly quoted, and that too, as far as it is in my power
stands to be the case in the future; This will then be the remaining printing errors
(which, with all due care, are unavoidable) can be easily controlled.
Since I quote the songs after consecutive numbers (as she adds upright), so
may the concordance between these and the ten books separate here
Numbers are indicated:
  1-191 = 1.1-1.191,
192-244 = 2,1-2,43
235-296 = 3.1- 3.62,
297--354 = 4.1-4.58,
355--441 = 5.1--5.87,
442--516 = 6.1-6.75,
517--620 = 7.1-7.104,
621--712 = 8,1--8,92,
713--826 = 9.1-9.114,
827--1017 = 10.1 to 10.191,
1018--1028 = Vālakhilya 1-11.

Szczecin 10th August 1872.
The author.

[Non-ascii characters: ä á ö ü ṙ ṝ ŕ ṛ ā ū û ṅ ç ī ṣ r̄ ē ō â ã à ý ˘ ó í ṭ ]
